Blog/modifying blocks (#148)
infinum/eightshift-docs: website/blog/2022-03-04-modifying-blocks.md

---
title: Modifying blocks - Color Theme

> description: Step-by-step guide how to modify and expand functionality of existing blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Step-by-step guide on how to modify and expand the functionality of existing blocks.
```

slug: modifying-blocks-color-theme
authors: iobrado
date: 2022-03-21
tags: [eightshift, boilerplate, components, blocks]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

In our previous post, we covered how to use Storybook and WP-CLI for adding additional blocks into your project. This post will walk you step-by-step on how to modify an existing block.
<!--truncate-->

Since Eightshift Development kit is a starter theme, made for developers to jumpstart and speed up their development, you're welcome to modify files directly in it. There is no need to create a child theme to protect it from updates.

### Modifying a block or a component?

> Since we used Quote block in our previous post, we will continue using it as an example since it's fairly simple. One of the first questions you may ask yourself could be: "Should I modify a component or a block?". And the answer is - it depends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we used Quote block in our previous post, we will continue using it as an example since it's a fairly simple one. One of the first questions you may ask yourself could be: "Should I modify a component or a block?". And the answer is - it depends.
```

> If you compare **_components/quote/quote.php_** (component) and **_custom/quote/quote.php_** (block), you'll notice most HTML code is inside a component, while block pretty much only renders the Quote component inside a wrapper. This example will walk you through the whole process of adding a new attribute and its options to a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you compare **_components/quote/quote.php_** (component) and **_custom/quote/quote.php_** (block), you'll notice that the most of HTML code is inside a component, while the block pretty much only renders the Quote component inside a wrapper. This example will walk you through the whole process of adding a new attribute and its options to a block.
```

### What will we do?

We want to add one new feature to this block. An option to choose a color theme for the Quote block. These are the specs:
- background with rounded corners
- three color themes: blue, green, yellow
- the background has a lighter shade of the selected color
- quote icon has a stronger shade of the selected color

### Adding background

Initial background styling is fairly straightforward. Navigate to **_src/Blocks/components/quote/quote-style.scss_** and paste the following code inside `.quote` class:

> ```css

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion

```css
~~~

padding: calc(var(--base-font-size) * 1.6rem);
border-radius: calc(var(--base-font-size) * 2rem);
background-color: global-settings(colors, light);
```

> You may notice we're using `calc` instead of directly writing values in rems. This way makes it much easier to calculate pixel size since `calc(var(--base-font-size) * 1.6rem)` equals `16px`.

Reviewer: You should mention that the `--base-font-size` is also set to a certain value.

Also, IIRC, @volfkarlo mentioned that we should abandon this because it can affect the performance?

Reviewer: We can update this later after the fix is added to the libs

For now, we will add a simple light grey background to see how it looks. We'll replace this value later with a CSS variable.
>**Note:** don't hardcode hex color values directly inside your component. Instead, use colors defined in your global manifest.

> You'll notice that the changes are visible both in the editor and on the frontend. Since Gutenberg editor has some specific quirks, sometimes you will need to add additional styling only for the editor. In case we need to override something in the editor for our Quote component, we would simply create **_quote-editor.scss_**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll notice that the changes are visible both in the editor and on the frontend. Since Gutenberg editor has some additional markup, sometimes you will need to add additional styling only for the editor. In case we need to override something in the editor for our Quote component, we would simply create **_quote-editor.scss_**.
```

### Adding new colors to your project

> Since the theme currently doesn't have all the colors we need to implement the color theme feature for our block, we have to add a few new colors to our project. We will use the colors already defined in the manifest for icon color, but we need to add lighter variations of those colors to use them for the background. Navigate to your global manifest, which is located inside **_src/Blocks/manifest.json_** and add the following values inside `colors`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the theme currently doesn't have all the colors, we need to implement the color theme feature for our block. We will use the colors already defined in the manifest for icon color, but we need to add lighter variations of those colors to use them for the background. Navigate to your global manifest, which is located inside **_src/Blocks/manifest.json_** and add the following values inside `colors`:
```

```json
"variables": {
	"quoteColorTheme": {
		"blue": [
			{
				"variable": {
					"quote-background-color": "var(--global-colors-light-blue)",
					"quote-icon-color": "var(--global-colors-blue)"
				}
			}
		],
		"green": [
			{
				"variable": {
					"quote-background-color": "var(--global-colors-light-green)",
					"quote-icon-color": "var(--global-colors-green)"
				}
			}
		],
		"yellow": [
			{
				"variable": {
					"quote-background-color": "var(--global-colors-light-yellow)",
					"quote-icon-color": "var(--global-colors-yellow)"
				}
			}
		]
	}
}
```

Now, navigate back to Quote component's **_quote-style.scss_** and replace `background-color` which we used for testing with the following value:
```css
background-color: var(--quote-background-color);
```

As you can see, the variable name is the same one we used for defining background color variations in the manifest. For icon color, we do the same. After adding a new color to `&__icon` selector, our code should now look like this:

```css
&__icon {
	display: block;
	margin-bottom: 1rem;
	color: var(--quote-icon-color);
}
```

### Outputting CSS variables in editor

> To make our color theme visible in editor, we have to add few lines of code to **_src/Blocks/components/quote/components/quote-editor.js_** file. First, we need to import a few functions. We need `useMemo` from **_react_**, `outputCssVariables` and `getUnique` from **_@eightshift/frontend-libs/scripts_** and finally, we need data from global manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make our color theme visible in editor, we have to add few lines of code to **_src/Blocks/components/quote/components/quote-editor.js_** file. First, we need to import a few functions. We need `useMemo` from **_react_**, `outputCssVariables` and `getUnique` from **_@eightshift/frontend-libs/scripts_** and finally, we need data from the global manifest.
```

### Outputting CSS variables in PHP template
The PHP template for the Quote component is located in **_src/Blocks/components/quote/quote.php_**. This process is similar to the one described above, it's just written in PHP. All helper methods we need for this are contained inside the `Components` class, which is already included in this file.

Similar to the JS template, we need a unique value, assign it to `data-id`, and output CSS variables. After adding these, the code should look like this:

```php
<?php
//...
$quoteClass = Components::classnames([
	Components::selector($componentClass, $componentClass),
	Components::selector($blockClass, $blockClass, $selectorClass),
	Components::selector($additionalClass, $additionalClass),
]);

$unique = Components::getUnique();
?>

<figure class="<?php echo \esc_attr($quoteClass); ?>" data-id="<?php echo \esc_attr($unique); ?>">
	<?php echo Components::outputCssVariables($attributes, $manifest, $unique, $globalManifest); ?>
	//...
```

> > Both PHP and JS have the same helpers to make writing code for editor and front view as identical as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Both PHP and JS have the same helpers to make writing code for editor and front view as similar as possible.
```

### Adding options
After adding these snippets, you should already see that your block is using the blue color theme, which we defined as the default value for `quoteColorTheme` in the manifest. We want to have an easy way to change the color theme in the editor. Now we'll add a new option which will do just that.

We will add these options in **_src/Blocks/components/quote/components/quote-options.js_**. Again, we will start with the imports we will need. First one is `__` from **_@wordpress/i18n_** package. Additional imports we need are from **_@eightshift/frontend-libs/scripts_**, so we will just add those to the list.
```js
import { __ } from '@wordpress/i18n';
import {

> 	//...

Reviewer: Why ... here?

Author: I'm using this to reduce the amount of code in example. Instead of listing everything inside that import, i just added `//...`

Reviewer: The imports are present in the previous posts, right? Is so, then it's ok to shorten them 👍🏼

Author: The idea behind these code examples isn't to just blindly copy/paste them, but to see which parts are newly added and where with reference to existing code. Since there are quite a bit of imports in this example, I didn't want to list all of them here. I may add an additional explanation somewhere in the post about what `//...` comment means so people aren't confused.

But this is great that you commented on this. I thought this was self-explanatory. Guess I thought wrong 😄

	ColorPaletteCustom,
	IconLabel,
	icons,
	getOption
} from '@eightshift/frontend-libs/scripts';
```

> Next, we can add a new attribute in options called `showQuoteColorTheme` and set it to `true` by default. If we will use this component in other blocks, we can use this attribute for showing or hiding Color Theme Options on a specific block that uses the Quote component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we can add a new attribute in options called `showQuoteColorTheme` and set it to `true` by default. If we want to use this component in other blocks, we can use this attribute for showing or hiding Color Theme Options on a specific block that uses the Quote component.
```

Was this the intended meaning?

Author: Yes, great suggestion 😄

```

Finally, we add the Color Palette, which we will use for switching color themes.

```js
return (
	<>
		//...

		{quoteUse &&
			<>
				{showQuoteColorTheme &&
					<ColorPaletteCustom
						label={<IconLabel icon={icons.color} label={__('Color Theme', 'es-theme')} />}
						colors={getOption('quoteColorTheme', attributes, manifest, true)}
						value={quoteColorTheme}
						onChange={(value) => setAttributes({ [getAttrKey('quoteColorTheme', attributes, manifest)]: value })}
					/>
				}
			//...
```

The Color Theme option should now be visible and fully functional inside the Quote block.

![Color Theme Options](/img/blog/color-theme-options.png)

### Adding transitions in the editor

The options work, but you may notice there is no transition in the editor. It is not necessary but will improve the user experience. Since we do not need transition effects on the frontend, we can add these CSS rules only to the editor. To do that, we start by creating **_quote-editor.scss_** file inside **_src/Blocks/components/quote_** folder.

We add the following CSS:
```css
.quote {
	transition: background-color 0.3s ease-in-out;

	&__icon {
		transition: color 0.3s ease-in-out;
	}
}
```

> Since we've added a new file, we have to run `npm start` again. Now the transition between colors will be much smoother.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we've added a new file, we have to run `npm start` again. Now the transition between colors will be much smoother.
```

### Modifying a block or a component?
Because we used Quote block in our previous post, we will continue using it as an example since it's a fairly simple one. One of the first questions you may ask yourself could be: "Should I modify a component or a block?". And the answer is - it depends.

If you compare **_components/quote/quote.php_** (component) and **_custom/quote/quote.php_** (block), you'll notice that the most of HTML code is inside a component, while the block pretty much only renders the Quote component inside a wrapper. This example will walk you through the whole process of adding a new attribute and its options to a block.

### What will we do?

We want to add one new feature to this block. An option to choose a color theme for the Quote block. These are the specs:
- background with rounded corners
- three color themes: blue, green, yellow
- the background has a lighter shade of the selected color
- quote icon has a stronger shade of the selected color

> 

Author: Do you have any tips how to make it more clear? Would adding an image showcasing the blocks with 3 color themes help?

### Adding background

Initial background styling is fairly straightforward. Navigate to **_src/Blocks/components/quote/quote-style.scss_** and paste the following code inside `.quote` class:

```css
padding: calc(var(--base-font-size) * 1.6rem);
border-radius: calc(var(--base-font-size) * 2rem);
background-color: global-settings(colors, light);
```
You may notice we're using `calc` instead of directly writing values in rems. This way makes it much easier to calculate pixel size since `calc(var(--base-font-size) * 1.6rem)` equals `16px`.

For now, we will add a simple light grey background to see how it looks. We'll replace this value later with a CSS variable.
>**Note:** don't hardcode hex color values directly inside your component. Instead, use colors defined in your global manifest.

You'll notice that the changes are visible both in the editor and on the frontend. Since Gutenberg editor has some additional markup, sometimes you will need to add additional styling only for the editor. In case we need to override something in the editor for our Quote component, we would simply create **_quote-editor.scss_**.

### Adding new colors to your project

> Because the theme currently doesn't have all the colors, we need to implement the color theme feature for our block. We will use the colors already defined in the manifest for icon color, but we need to add lighter variations of those colors to use them for the background. Navigate to your global manifest, which is located inside **_src/Blocks/manifest.json_** and add the following values inside `colors`:

Author: Looks like I got lost in my thoughts when writing that part 😅  what I wanted to say is that we need to add additional colors which we will use for our Color Theme feature.

```json
{
	"name": "Light Blue",
	"slug": "light-blue",
	"color": "#B3E5FC"
},
{
	"name": "Light Green",
	"slug": "light-green",
	"color": "#DCEDC8"
},
{
	"name": "Light Yellow",
	"slug": "light-yellow",
	"color": "#FFF9C4"
}
```

### Adding a new attribute and options to manifest

> To choose which color theme we want to use for our Quote block, we need to define it in the manifest. Navigate to **_src/Blocks/components/quote/manifest.json_** and add the following value inside `attributes`:

Reviewer 2: I tried to make this first sentence a bit more clear:
```suggestion
For editors to be able to choose which color theme to use for the Quote block, we need to define an attribute for it in the manifest. Navigate to **_src/Blocks/components/quote/manifest.json_** and add the following value inside `attributes`:
```

```json
"quoteColorTheme": {
	"type": "string",
	"default": "blue"
}
```

> > Double-check the path of manifest used in this example. We're adding it inside the Quote component manifest, not the Quote block manifest. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Double-check the path of the manifest used in this example. We're adding it inside the Quote component manifest, not the Quote block manifest. 
```

After that, since we want to have a fixed number of options, we need to define available options. We can do that inside `options` which is on the same level as `attributes`:
```json
"options": {
	"quoteColorTheme": [
		"blue",
		"green",
		"yellow"
	]
}
```

### CSS variables

Our next step is to add CSS variables to the Quote component's manifest. Inside **_manifest.json_**, on the same level as `attributes`, add the following code:
```json
"variables": {
	"quoteColorTheme": {
		"blue": [
			{
				"variable": {
					"quote-background-color": "var(--global-colors-light-blue)",
					"quote-icon-color": "var(--global-colors-blue)"
				}
			}
		],
		"green": [
			{
				"variable": {
					"quote-background-color": "var(--global-colors-light-green)",
					"quote-icon-color": "var(--global-colors-green)"
				}
			}
		],
		"yellow": [
			{
				"variable": {
					"quote-background-color": "var(--global-colors-light-yellow)",
					"quote-icon-color": "var(--global-colors-yellow)"
				}
			}
		]
	}
}
```

> Now, navigate back to Quote component's **_quote-style.scss_** and replace `background-color` which we used for testing with the following value:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, navigate back to Quote component's **_quote-style.scss_** and replace the `background-color` which we used for testing with the following:
```

```css
background-color: var(--quote-background-color);
```

> As you can see, the variable name is the same one we used for defining background color variations in the manifest. For icon color, we do the same. After adding a new color to `&__icon` selector, our code should now look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see, the variable name is the same one we used when defining background color variations in the manifest. For icon color, we do the same. After adding a new color to `&__icon` selector, our code should now look like this:
```

After importing these and defining a unique constant, your code should look like this:

```js
import React, { useMemo } from 'react';
import classnames from 'classnames';
import { checkAttr, props, selector, outputCssVariables, getUnique } from '@eightshift/frontend-libs/scripts';
import { HeadingEditor } from '../../heading/components/heading-editor';
import { ParagraphEditor } from '../../paragraph/components/paragraph-editor';
import manifest from './../manifest.json';
import globalManifest from './../../../manifest.json';

export const QuoteEditor = (attributes) => {
	const unique = useMemo(() => getUnique(), []);
	//...
```
Next, we need to add a unique `data-id` and output the `<style>` tag containing CSS variables.

Modify your return statement so it looks like this:

```jsx
return (
	<>
		<figure className={quoteClass} data-id={unique}>
			{outputCssVariables(attributes, manifest, unique, globalManifest)}
			//...
```

If you try adding a Quote block in the editor, you should notice that now it has a light blue background with a quote icon in a darker shade of blue. This equals our default value for the `quoteColorTheme` attribute we added in the component's manifest.

> ### Outputting CSS variables in PHP template

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Outputting CSS variables in PHP templates
```

or

```suggestion
### Outputting CSS variables in the PHP template
```
